# Overview

This page provides some ESP-specific instructions for running QEMU. Refer to the official documentation for general QEMU usage questions: https://www.qemu.org/documentation/.

# Compiling QEMU

## Prerequisites

Beforehand, please check QEMU documentation regarding build prerequisites. If you are building QEMU on a Linux host, you can refer to [this page](https://wiki.qemu.org/Hosts/Linux#Building_QEMU_for_Linux).

In addition to QEMU's prerequisites, make sure that `libgcrypt` is installed on your system (`libgcrypt-devel` on Ubuntu, `libgcrypt` on Arch, `libgcrypt` on macOS Homebrew).

## Configure

To generate the `ninja` build files, we need to configure the project first, the following command can be used for that:

```bash
./configure --target-list=xtensa-softmmu \
    --enable-gcrypt \
    --enable-debug --enable-sanitizers \
    --disable-strip --disable-user \
    --disable-capstone --disable-vnc \
    --disable-sdl --disable-gtk
```

To reduce the first compilation time, feel free to add more `--disable` options. The complete list of options that can be enabled or disabled can be obtained with `./configure --help` command.

## Build

After configuring the project successfully, `ninja` can be used to build it:

```
ninja -C build
```

Compilation can take a few minutes depending on the components that were enabled or disabled previously. Upon completion, `build/qemu-system-xtensa` should be created.

# Compiling the ESP-IDF program to emulate

QEMU for ESP32 target is ready, it already includes the first stage bootloader, located on the ROM on the real chip, which is mainly responsible for initializing the peripherals, like the UART and, more importantly, the SPI Flash. The latter **must** contain the second stage bootloader and the program to run.

Thus, in this section, we are going to create a flash image that combines the (second stage) bootloader, the partition table and the application to run. This can be done using `esptool.py merge_bin` command, supported in `esptool.py` 3.1 or later. Let's suppose that the ESP-IDf project has just been compiled successfully, the following commands will create that flash image:

```bash
cd build
esptool.py --chip esp32 merge_bin --fill-flash-size 4MB -o flash_image.bin @flash_args
```

Here, `flash_args` is a file generated by ESP-IDF build system in the build directory, it contains the list of names of binary files and corresponding flash addresses. `merge_bin` command takes this list and creates the binary image of the whole flash. `--fill-flash-size 4MB` argument specifies the total flash size.

ESP32 target in QEMU supports flash of size 2, 4, 8 and 16MB, creating an image with any other size will result in an error.

**Notes**

* For "Secure Boot" feature in ESP-IDF, we recommend separate command to flash bootloader and hence `flash_args` file do not have corresponding entry. However, you may modify `flash_args` file to add entry for `bootloader.bin` as per below:

    ```
    0x1000 bootloader/bootloader.bin
    ```

* It is also possible to use `esptool.py` to "flash" the application into QEMU, but QEMU needs to be started with the right strapping mode. [See Bootstrapping Mode section below for more info](#specifying-bootstrapping-mode).

# Run QEMU

## Without attaching GDB

If you don't need to debug the guest application, you can execute QEMU without attaching GDB to it:
```
build/qemu-system-xtensa -nographic \
    -machine esp32 \
    -drive file=flash_image.bin,if=mtd,format=raw
```
Where `flash_image.bin` is the SPI flash image generated previously.

## With GDB server, waiting for a connection

If you need to debug the guest application, you can execute QEMU with `-s -S` options. This tells QEMU not to start the CPU after initializing the virtual machine. It will wait for a connection from a GDB client:
```
build/qemu-system-xtensa -nographic -s -S \
    -machine esp32 \
    -drive file=flash_image.bin,if=mtd,format=raw
```
Where `flash_image.bin` is the SPI flash image generated previously.

Then, to connect the GDB client, use the following command:
```
xtensa-esp32-elf-gdb build/app-name.elf \
    -ex "target remote :1234" \
    -ex "monitor system_reset" \
    -ex "tb app_main" -ex "c"
```
The last line sets a breakpoint in `app_main` function of the guest application and starts the virtual CPU with `c`. If you need to put a breakpoint in any other functions or if you don't need to start the CPU directly, please adapt this last line.

### GDB and toolchain compatibility

If you are using **esp2021r1** or an earlier toolchain release, GDB may report the following error when connecting to QEMU:

```
Remote 'g' packet reply is too long (expected 420 bytes, got 628 bytes):
```

In that case, you need to set the following environment variable beforehand:

```
export QEMU_XTENSA_CORE_REGS_ONLY=1
```

When this environment variable is set, QEMU will only send the values of non-privileged registers to GDB.

If you are using later releases of Xtensa toolchain, i.e. **esp-2021r2** and later, GDB will work out-of-the-box, without the need to set this environment variable.

## Hardware crypto support

Starting from IDF 4.1, the following hardware crypto features are enabled by default: AES, SHA, RSA.

All of them are implemented in QEMU for ESP32 target. However, please note that the SHA emulation currently doesn't support concurrent operations with different SHA types.

## Ethernet support

Support for Opencores Ethernet MAC in ESP-IDF is added in https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/commit/31dac92e5f0daac98190fd603df213a0a25a3807.

* When running `protocols` examples, enable `CONFIG_EXAMPLE_CONNECT_ETHERNET` and `CONFIG_EXAMPLE_USE_OPENETH`.
* When running a custom app, enable `CONFIG_ETH_USE_OPENETH` and initialize the Ethernet driver as it is done in examples/common_components/protocol_examples_common/connect.c (look for `esp_eth_mac_new_openeth`).

When starting QEMU, use `open_eth` network device.

### User mode networking
For example, to start networking in user mode (TCP/UDP only, emulated device is behind NAT), add the following option to the QEMU command line:
```
-nic user,model=open_eth
```
Some ESP projects (specifically running TCP listeners) might need port forwarding to be setup,

```
-nic user,model=open_eth,id=lo0,hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:PORT_HOST-:PORT_GUEST
```
(e.g. asio-echo-server sets up a server on 2222 by default, so `hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:2222-:2222` enables to `nc localhost 2222` from host machine)

### Bridge/tap networking

* [Tap networking](tap-networking.md)

## Specifying bootstrapping mode

To specify the desired strapping mode, it is necessary to add the following argument when running QEMU:

```
-global driver=esp32.gpio,property=strap_mode,value=0x0f
```

This sets the value of `GPIO_STRAP` register.
* Use `0x12` for flash boot mode (default)
* Use `0x0f` for UART-only download mode (since the SDIO part is not implemented)

## Specifying eFuse storage

Add extra arguments to the command line:

```
-drive file=qemu_efuse.bin,if=none,format=raw,id=efuse
-global driver=nvram.esp32.efuse,property=drive,value=efuse
```

The first argument creates a block device backed by `qemu_efuse.bin` file, with identifier `efuse`. The second line configures `nvram.esp32.efuse` device to use this block device for storage.

The file must be created before starting QEMU:

```
dd if=/dev/zero bs=1 count=124 of=/tmp/qemu_efuse.bin
```

124 bytes is the total size of ESP32 eFuse blocks.

**Note**

Specifying eFuse storage is mandatory to test out any platform security features like "Secure Boot" or "Flash Encryption".

## Emulating ESP32 ECO3

For the application to detect the emulated chip as ESP32 ECO3, the following virtual efuses must be set:

* CHIP_VER_REV1
* CHIP_VER_REV2

Here is the corresponding efuse file (in hexadecimal, produced using `xxd -p`):

```
000000000000000000000000008000000000000000001000000000000000
000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
00000000
```

To convert this (`efuse.hex`) back to binary, run `xxd -r -p efuse.hex qemu_efuse.bin`.

Alternatively, these bits can be set using espefuse:

```
espefuse.py --port=socket://localhost:5555 burn_efuse CHIP_VER_REV1
espefuse.py --port=socket://localhost:5555 burn_efuse CHIP_VER_REV2
```

## Disabling the watchdogs
By default, Timer Group watchdog timers are emulated, and TG0 WDT is enabled at reset. It is sometimes useful to disable these watchdog timers. This can be done by adding the following to the command line:

```
-global driver=timer.esp32.timg,property=wdt_disable,value=true
```

This disables the emulation of TG watchdog timers. Even if the application configures them, they will not fire.

The RTC watchdog timer is not emulated yet, so it doesn't need to be disabled.

## Using esptool.py and espefuse.py to interact with QEMU

1. Start QEMU:
    ```
    build/qemu-system-xtensa -nographic \
        -machine esp32 \
        -drive file=flash_image.bin,if=mtd,format=raw \
        -global driver=esp32.gpio,property=strap_mode,value=0x0f \
        -drive file=qemu_efuse.bin,if=none,format=raw,id=efuse \
        -global driver=nvram.esp32.efuse,property=drive,value=efuse \
        -serial tcp::5555,server,nowait
    ```

    The final line redirects the emulated UART to TCP port 5555 (QEMU acts as a server).

    Type q and press Enter at any time to quit.

1. Run esptool.py:

    ```
    esptool.py -p socket://localhost:5555 flash_id
    ```

    Flashing with `idf.py` also works:

    ```
    export ESPPORT=socket://localhost:5555
    idf.py flash
    ```

1. Or, run espefuse.py:

    ```
    espefuse.py --port socket://localhost:5555 --do-not-confirm burn_custom_mac 00:11:22:33:44:55
    ```

Note: `esptool` can **not** reset the emulated chip using the RTS signal, because the state of RTS is not transmitted over TCP to QEMU. To reset the emulated chip, run `system_reset` command in QEMU console (started at step 1).

## Specifying ROM ELF file

If `-kernel` and `-bios` arguments are not given, ESP32 (rev. 3) ROM code will be loaded. This ROM code binary is included in the repository. To specify the ROM code ELF file to load, pass the filename with a `-bios <filename>` argument.

## Using flash encryption

### Self-encryption workflow

1. In the IDF application, enable `CONFIG_SECURE_FLASH_ENC_ENABLED` through `menuconfig`, and build it
1. Build the flash image as per the instructions from the [Compiling the ESP-IDF program to emulate](#compiling-the-esp-idf-program-to-emulate) section.
2. Create `qemu_efuse.bin` as highlighted in the [Specifying eFuse storage](#specifying-efuse-storage) section.
3. Execute `qemu-system-xtensa` using the following command:
    ```
    build/qemu-system-xtensa -nographic -machine esp32 \
        -drive file=/path/to/qemu_efuse.bin,if=none,format=raw,id=efuse   \
        -global driver=nvram.esp32.efuse,property=drive,value=efuse       \
        -drive file=/path/to/flash_image.bin,if=mtd,format=raw            \
        -global driver=timer.esp32.timg,property=wdt_disable,value=true
    ```

## Adding PSRAM

QEMU "memory size" option can be used to enable PSRAM emulation. By default, no PSRAM is added to the machine. You can add 2MB or 4MB PSRAM using `-m 2M` or `-m 4M` command line options, respectively.

Note that PSRAM MMU is not emulated yet, so things like bank switching (`himem` in IDF) do not work.

## Using SD cards

QEMU emulates SD/MMC host controller used in ESP32. To add an SD card to the system, create an image and pass it to QEMU.

1. Create a raw image file, for example, 64 MB:
    ```
    $ dd if=/dev/zero bs=$((1024*1024)) count=64 of=sd_image.bin
    ```

2. Add the following argument when running QEMU:
    ```
    -drive file=sd_image.bin,if=sd,format=raw
    ```

If you need to create a large SD card image, it is recommended to use sparse `cqow2` images instead of raw ones. Consult QEMU manual about `qemu-img` tool for details.

Only one SD card is supported at a time. You can use either slot 0 or slot 1 of the SD/MMC controller in the application code.
